Formation of WG Naming (#4884)
kubernetes/community: wg-naming/README.md

<!---
This is an autogenerated file!

Please do not edit this file directly, but instead make changes to the
sigs.yaml file in the project root.

To understand how this file is generated, see https://git.k8s.io/community/generator/README.md
--->
# Naming Working Group

## Stakeholder SIGs
* SIG Architecture
* SIG Contributor Experience
* SIG Docs

## Organizers

* Celeste Horgan (**[@celestehorgan](https://github.com/celestehorgan)**), CNCF
* Stephen Augustus (**[@justaugustus](https://github.com/justaugustus)**), VMware
* Zach Corleissen (**[@zacharysarah](https://github.com/zacharysarah)**), Linux Foundation

## Contact
- Slack: [#wg-naming](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/wg-naming)
- [Mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-wg-naming)
- [Open Community Issues/PRs](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/labels/wg%2Fnaming)
<!-- BEGIN CUSTOM CONTENT -->

**The following section will be reworked and formalized as a charter once the
Working Group has been approved by the Steering Committee.**

### Goals

- Evaluate language and naming choices within the Kubernetes organization, with
  a specific initial focus of:

>   - Removing language which cannot be fully separated from racist, sexist or

Reviewer: This list isn't complete (missing ableist and transphobic at least). Rather than try to list every group, what about just saying "Removing language which alienates unpriviliged groups of people" or something like that.

Reviewer 2: "Removing language which causes harm to protected classes and under-represented individuals" maybe?

Reviewer 3: > Rather than try to list every group, what about just saying "Removing language which alienates unpriviliged groups of people" or something like that.

This seems like a good idea.

Reviewer: > "Removing language which causes harm to protected classes and under-represented individuals" maybe?

One more thought, I think our standard should be being excellent to each other, not just lack of harm (which is why I used the word "alienates")... I guess running with that thought, we could try to phrase in the positive, like "Ensure all language is inclusive of protected classes and under-represented individuals, by removing any that is not." (Honestly I'm not sure if the classes of people I'd want to be excellent to are all "protected" and probably not in all jurisdictions, so I'd go for something even broader, but that's just me personally.)

Anyway I don't actually have a strong opinion other than an incomplete list is probably not good.

Reviewer 4: I appreciate the drive for language that's more inclusive and oriented towards positive outcomes. I appreciate that "alphabet soup" lists often seem cumbersome and do shift over time as awareness and specificity grow. 

There's a reason why lists get longer rather than shorter. It matters to be specific. "Diversity and inclusion" are empty words. The goal of this WG is to stop harm. The reason why this WG exists is because the generic language we already have doesn't stop harm.

Generic language obscures harm rather than cultivating good action; note _action_, not intent. I assume everyone's intent is only for the best; and intent is irrelevant to the discussion. We can't control people's intent, or even assess it meaningfully. We can only assess actions, and so we have to be specific about what actions cause harm.

When people don't know that they specifically are protected and welcome, they tend to assume they're not--whether for race, gender, sexual orientation, or any other group.

I need to be clear that ongoing "debate" here does more harm than good. Endless reviews and decision by committee is a tactic for stalling meaningful change. We will inevitably fall short with whatever language we use, and we'll need to iterate to improve it. So it goes. 

As for actual suggestions, maybe:
```suggestion
  - Removing barriers to contribution and adoption by replacing harmful language with neutral terms whenever possible, including but not limited to language linked to racism, sexism, homophobia, transphobia, ableism, or discrimination against any protected or historically underrepresented group.
```

Reviewer 5: @zacharysarah i'd prefer to think that everyone reviewing this proposal is doing it in good faith. I don't think we have reached the "Endless reviews" threshold. I don't saying things like "decision by committee is a tactic for stalling meaningful change" is fruitful to the effort we are involved in. So far it's taken the "normal" route/time. So let's focus on what we need to do together in good faith.

Reviewer 2: To be clear, this has been a documented issue in our community for over a year (2 years?) so it's reasonable to skew towards action. I think the update suggested above is a good one, and balances specificity with some placeholders for evolving awareness.

Reviewer 5: @jdumars is the "stalling" (words from Zach) for 2 years (your count) because of active opposition? or is it because of lack of hands to do the work?

Reviewer 4: @dims Let's please refocus on the goal of approving a working group.

Reviewer 6: I agree with @dims that everyone here is working in good faith towards the goal of approving a working group. Like any organization the size of Kubernetes, we have governance processes to go though, and review/approval of the goals and criteria of a WG would be the same no matter the topic the WG is attempting to tackle.

I am completely good and supportive of @zacharysarah's suggestion around revised language for this point.

Reviewer 7: We will take @zacharysarah's suggestion then, and consider this discussion thread closed.

    homophobic connotations in cultural contexts outside of computer
    programming
  - Improving clarity of codebases and documentation by replacing idioms,
    metaphors and slang specific to the English language

> - Create a list of terms to avoid and propose alternatives

Reviewer 3: Could we re-order this point with respect to creating the process and then provide clarity about whether this initial list would follow the same process that will be used for future terms?

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure what you're looking for in regards to reordering the list. 

1. What do you think needs reordering?
2. What does reordering the list accomplish?

Reviewer 3: > I'm not sure what you're looking for in regards to reordering the list.
> 
> 1. What do you think needs reordering?
> 2. What does reordering the list accomplish?

When reading this doc, I'm unsure whether 
 1. the process created to evaluate problematic language will be used to create this list of terms, or 
 2. whether some other process will be used to create the initial list since you already have a document started.

I think it would be a good idea to use the process proposed by this working group to drive the selection of terms for this list, but I'd like to see an explicit statement of intent either way.

> - Create a list of terms to avoid and propose alternatives

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Create a list of harmful terms with proposed replacements
```

Reviewer 7: Taking this suggestion.

> - Define a process by which any member of the Kubernetes organization can

Reviewer 8: nit: s/organization/project everywhere in this doc

Maybe it's just me, the word "organization" reads to me as the GitHub org while "project" seems more encompassing

Reviewer 9: nit: The goal is:
 `Define a process to propose a language (this is quite broad) recommendation`

I think this wording could be changed (or possibly hold off on these specifics):
`have *them* evaluated based on a rubric`
`see *them* implemented across *all* codebases`

> - Define a process by which any member of the Kubernetes organization can

Reviewer 10: Should this wg **define** a process? I could understand that it works out a proposal to be accepted or rejected then by a higher level. But definition means that it is valid. Be clear where the limit is of this goal.

>   propose a language recommendation, have them evaluated based on a rubric, and

Reviewer 8: Want to make sure I understand what "language recommendation" means here. Would it be something like "I'd like to recommend the project not to use XXX term because of YYY connotation"?

Reviewer 7: Along those lines, yes. 

The idea with this bullet point is to accommodate the future with a process, so that the next time we're in a cultural moment like this one, we won't need to go through the WG formation process again. It'll essentially be documenting the how-to of proposing a change, and how any stakeholders involved in the future should evaluate that request.

Reviewer: I suggest instead of "evaluated based on a rubric" you add another line item about defining a process for evaluating proposals. So, a process for suggesting some language is harmful, and a process for evaluating suggestions. Then the specifics of those processes don't need to block getting this PR merged.

(I'm not claiming a rubric is the wrong way to go, just that there's probably a discussion to be had and it doesn't need to happen here.)

Reviewer: (sorry for poor conversational flow, github hadn't shown me the previous comment)

Reviewer 7: Taking these suggestions and implementing per https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/4884/files#r445263740

>   propose a language recommendation, have them evaluated based on a rubric, and

Reviewer 3: Since working groups disband, I think we'll also need to define long term ownership for the process (is it the sponsoring sigs?) and be sure to include the current leads of that group as approvers of the process.  Speaking of which, who will be the approvers of the process?

Reviewer: > long term ownership

I think there will be some ongoing actions, hopefully very minimal, like keeping presubmit checks up-to-date. I don't think the exact structure needs to be figured out here, maybe just say that finding a home for ongoing tasks is an exit criteria for the WG.

Reviewer 6: Long term ownership needs to reside with a long term group (SIG or committee of some kind). Agree with @lavalamp, doesn't need to be solved now, but should be called out as part of the exit criteria for the WG

Reviewer 3: > > long term ownership
> 
> I think there will be some ongoing actions, hopefully very minimal, like keeping presubmit checks up-to-date. I don't think the exact structure needs to be figured out here, maybe just say that finding a home for ongoing tasks is an exit criteria for the WG.

I'm not looking to identify long term ownership in the charter, merely pointing out that the charter should acknowledge the need for long term ownership of the process and that the working group ought to present the proposed process to the long term owner for approval as opposed to self-approving.

Reviewer 7: I think this is reasonable. I'll add a bullet point reading:

> "Define long-term ownership of this process"

Beyond that, I don't think it's worth diving into the weeds much more during the formation proposal. Sound good? :)

>   propose a language recommendation, have them evaluated based on a rubric, and

Reviewer 10: a process to propose recommendation by everyone is fine. What I totally miss: clarity on who will decide what to accept, reject, reword.

Reviewer 7: [See above](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/4884/files#r446369040). I think the WG can decide that as we go – that's a long-winded discussion that we can't do justice to here in the review.

> - Define a process by which any member of the Kubernetes organization can
>   propose a language recommendation, have them evaluated based on a rubric, and
>   see them implemented across all codebases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Define how any member of the Kubernetes project can
  recommend language, how others can evaluate that proposal, and how to 
  implement replacements across all codebases.
```

Reviewer 7: Taking this suggestion :+1:

  - Provide an easily findable location for language recommendations and
    follow-up issues, similar to an architectural decision record.
- Work with stakeholder SIGs to implement the changes recommended. We
  anticipate the following:
  - Provide stakeholder SIGs with guidance on naming, language conventions, and
    processes
  - Collaborate with SIG Architecture and other stakeholders on an
    implementation timeline and strategies for dealing with follow-up issues
    from renaming, like deprecations
  - Collaborate with SIG Docs and SIG Contributor Experience on documenting

>     language recommendations and processes

Reviewer 8: Would this also involve renaming the master branch for all repos and would renaming the branch be a criteria for dissolution? It's heavily tied to how quickly and widely GitHub responds so I just want us to be cognizant of that.

Reviewer 7: At the moment, CNCF is planning to wait for GitHub to roll out changes regarding master branch naming. We're hoping that waiting on GitHub to make changes centrally results in less tooling issues down the line.

Ultimately the choice lies with the community, but I would strongly recommend Kubernetes take the same tactic. Personally I would not include this discussion in the WG's domain – the WG should focus on Kubernetes and related projects only, not the wording in the tooling, code language or libraries Kubernetes uses.

Author: Yes, we're waiting for GitHub's lead here, and they should have a response soon.
(Discussed during the 6/25 [GitHub Administration meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IiVrr1hcFWmbboExk971FsMUGfr2Wp68mdMribCuzLs/edit#heading=h.5wzcacxwipf3).)

I'm taking point on this from the WG Naming side and will open an issue for this later in the week.

Author: (Added as a post-formation discussion point.)

>   - Work with the Code of Conduct Committee to add code architecture to the COC

Reviewer 2: We will help find a good home for this.

Author: (Added as a post-formation discussion point.)

Reviewer 6: @justaugustus As this was added to the post-formation discussion point, should this line still exist in the goals?

Author: @cblecker -- intentionally duplicated, so we'd know where to edit the language later

>   - Work with the Code of Conduct Committee to add code architecture to the COC

Reviewer 3: I'm not very clear on what this point means.

Reviewer 6: Neither am I. @justaugustus @celestehorgan @zacharysarah Could you elaborate on this point?

Reviewer 4: @deads2k @cblecker The goal is for inclusive naming in software architecture, not just in docs. For example, replacing "master/slave" terminology in docs but not in functions, classes, variables, etc. is an empty gesture. 

What's a more accurate way to refer to code in this specific context?

Reviewer 2: We may need the full @kubernetes/code-of-conduct-committee to weigh in on this. One could argue that code is language as much as an issue or Slack conversation. That would cover future cases, but remediation of existing code would have to be handled by individuals in the OWNERS files IMO, much like if someone trashes a GitHub issue, we (the CoC Committee) ask the Kubernetes GitHub admin team to remove the offending comments. I still believe the existing CoC covers this, as we collectively define the edges of what is acceptable or not. From the CoC specifically:

> We are committed to making participation in this project a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of level of experience, gender, gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, disability, personal appearance, body size, race, ethnicity, age, religion, or nationality.

Reviewer 6: Yeah, I don't think the CoC needs to be modified here. Perhaps this goal can be changed to "Review with CoCC guidelines and polices around use of language/terminology in code" or something similar?

The idea being:
- I honestly don't believe any of the terminology currently used in code was placed there intentionally to harass anyone (if this was the case, it would already be CoC covered)
- We still want to be able to make binding policies around how to remediate language used in code, to ensure it doesn't bring harm. How do we do that? (I agree with the binding part, but I'm not sure the CoC is the right tool)

But bringing it back to how to we approve this WG, I'd suggest changing this to "review" as I've suggested above will allow the freedom to explore this question throughly with the CoCC to answer if the CoC is or is not the right tool to address this.

Reviewer 7: For now, I suggest we remove any mention of the COCC from this WG, and put it as an agenda item for the WG's work. 

That said, per later discussion in this thread: @jdumars is joining us in this initiative, so involvement from that quarter will be there.

Author: (Added as a post-formation discussion point.)

> ### Dissolution Criteria

Reviewer 6: As mentioned above, can we add "finding long term homes for any policies that this WG creates"? (or something along those lines?

Reviewer 7: 👍 Sounds good, taking this suggestion

> When this WG dissolves, the Kubernetes community should have:

Reviewer 3: This is phrased as necessary, but doesn't indicate sufficiency.  Would the intent be preserved by rephrasing like this?

"Once the Kubernetes community has: 

  list-of-items-here

This working group will dissolve"

Reviewer 7: Yup! that works too :)

- A process in place to evaluate language changes on an ongoing basis

> - A list of terms to avoid in codebases across the organization

Reviewer 7: Per discussion below with @jdumars and @cblecker:

```suggestion
- A binding list of terms to avoid in codebases across the organization
```

Reviewer 2: This would be a good approach IMO.

Reviewer 7: OK then, taking this suggestion.

> - A timeline on which to replace component names in the kubernetes/kubernetes

Reviewer 3: It seems like sustainability after this working group disbands would require that the process create above and the future owners of that process, would need to be able to handle implementation and timeline.  Could we use that process and those owners to drive the first set of changes as well?  If not, can we have confidence that this effort will be self-sustaining over time?

See the comment from Celeste in this PR about avoiding the need to reform this group for the next cultural moment: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/4884/files#r445043710

Reviewer 10: What does "on which to replace" mean for such a timeline in an OpenSource project? Who drives it? Who contributes the resources to implement changes? I could imagine that the wg will output a plan with parties committed to implement it. I guess that's what this means, and not an order to be finished by date X.

Reviewer 6: Working with the stakeholders and code owners will be key. Yes, this effort will need to be resourced. We've had lots of interest and volunteers to help with this, but ensuring we do this in a way that doesn't introduce bugs/regressions will need effort from code owners.

What that timeline is and how it will be resourced is an open question for the working group (and one they can answer after formation IMO)

Reviewer 11: I offer to program-manage this effort to the extent of bringing the stakeholders and parties together to discuss a strategy for getting the work moving, tracking the work (including visualisations and self-reporting documents), and updating on progress. 

One of my first steps would be to bring folks together to discuss implementation strategy — how and where does the work start from a technical perspective.

Author: (Added as a post-formation discussion point.)

>   codebase

Reviewer 8: Few questions here:

- Would this WG focus only on k/k? My understanding was that it would look at naming practices across all our repos (even k-sigs, k-csi, k-client), docs, etc.

- Maybe it would be better to rename "component names" to something slightly more...generic? Just to ensure that we don't tie the dissolution criteria to only component names... :thinking: 

- Would the WG disband after a _timeline_ has been agreed upon or would it disband after all the changes have been made as per the timeline?

Reviewer 12: FWIW, I personally would find it helpful if the group stuck around until changes have been made.  The model I have is WG-Apply, which existed until server side apply was implement.

Reviewer 7: I haven't conferred with @justaugustus on this, so he may disagree, but here's my thoughts:

> Would this WG focus only on k/k? My understanding was that it would look at naming practices across all our repos (even k-sigs, k-csi, k-client), docs, etc.

Per an earlier comment, we're changing the wording in this WG to address the Kubernetes _project_ – so presumably.. everything? 😅 

> Maybe it would be better to rename "component names" to something slightly more...generic? Just to ensure that we don't tie the dissolution criteria to only component names... 🤔

+1! "feature names?" "method names"? I'm unsure. I'll brainstorm on this for a bit.

> Would the WG disband after a timeline has been agreed upon or would it disband after all the changes have been made as per the timeline?

Personally I'd like to stick around until work is executed for accountability's sake. This isn't high priority work in relation to new releases, for example, but I think it's high importance and I think having the WG around to see the work through would be good.

Author: (Added as a post-formation discussion point.)

Author: > I haven't conferred with @justaugustus on this, so he may disagree, but here's my thoughts:
> 
> > Would this WG focus only on k/k? My understanding was that it would look at naming practices across all our repos (even k-sigs, k-csi, k-client), docs, etc.
> 
> Per an earlier comment, we're changing the wording in this WG to address the Kubernetes _project_ – so presumably.. everything? sweat_smile
> 
> > Maybe it would be better to rename "component names" to something slightly more...generic? Just to ensure that we don't tie the dissolution criteria to only component names... thinking
> 
> +1! "feature names?" "method names"? I'm unsure. I'll brainstorm on this for a bit.
> 
> > Would the WG disband after a timeline has been agreed upon or would it disband after all the changes have been made as per the timeline?
> 
> Personally I'd like to stick around until work is executed for accountability's sake. This isn't high priority work in relation to new releases, for example, but I think it's high importance and I think having the WG around to see the work through would be good.

Agreed that the goal is to serve across the project, not just kubernetes/kubernetes.

> > Maybe it would be better to rename "component names" to something slightly more...generic? Just to ensure that we don't tie the dissolution criteria to only component names... thinking
> 
> +1! "feature names?" "method names"? I'm unsure. I'll brainstorm on this for a bit.

Yep. We can workshop the language post-formation.

> Personally I'd like to stick around until work is executed for accountability's sake. This isn't high priority work in relation to new releases, for example, but I think it's high importance and I think having the WG around to see the work through would be good.

Agreed. I also intend to action on changes ahead of WG dissolution.

> - A revised Code of Conduct including the list of terms to avoid

Reviewer 2: Our code of conduct is tied to the Contributor Covenant, so my feeling is we don't add this explicitly to the CoC itself, and instead offer guidance in the areas of documentation where it's appropriate. If someone continues using terminology we've eliminated from the project, we should provide guidance and evaluate on a case-by-case basis. It took a non-trivial amount of time to change terminology in the past, so we should expect a transition time.

Reviewer 6: As @jdumars mentions, we currently source text from the CNCF CoC policy (which is based on Contributor Covenant). If we find ways we can strengthen or clarify it, it's not impossible to do -- even advocating for those changes CNCF wide if need be. That said, I wouldn't say this is an explicit must as far as exit criteria for the WG, to modify it. It would be a larger undertaking. So perhaps strike this as a formal goal, and revisit with the CoCC as needed?

Reviewer 7: @jdumars I think not embedding it in the COC is reasonable, however I want to emphasize that we _don't_ want to provide just provide guidance – we want to provide _binding_ guidance.

Initiatives like this one often become wasted time because it's easy to produce guidance but hard to follow-through. The initial idea behind enshrining these requirements in the COC was to make them, well _required_, rather than suggested.

I'm happy to leave the format/final home fuzzy, but I would emphasize that the WG's recommendations are expected to be followed through on and adhered to in future.

Maybe..

```suggestion

```

Strike this line, and edit [this one?](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/4884/files#diff-bbd3d7bbc2884b2628bf43deea5e4391R65)

Reviewer 13: Given that the CoC already covers inappropriate or harassing language in code and documentation, the proposed result here is for this WG to _extend_ or _specify_ the list of terms or conditions when the CoC Committee would be called to act. In other words, this WG proposal, if it accomplishes its goal (and, personally, I think this is a great goal) would add additional work for the CoC Committee (at least under the current charter).

With that in mind, I would like to propose that the CoC Committee be considered a stakeholder SIG and one of our five members be added to the initial WG-leads list for WG-naming. I think that this WG and the CoCC work hand-in-hand to craft this language and then to roll out or advise on the implementation path.

Reviewer 2: I am volunteering to represent the committee for this work.

  implement replacements across all codebases.
  - Provide an easily findable location for language recommendations and
    follow-up issues, similar to an architectural decision record
  - Define long-term ownership of this process
- Work with stakeholder SIGs to implement the changes recommended. We
  anticipate the following:
  - Provide stakeholder SIGs with guidance on naming, language conventions, and
    processes
  - Collaborate with SIG Architecture and other stakeholders on an
    implementation timeline and strategies for dealing with follow-up issues
    from renaming, like deprecations
  - Collaborate with SIG Docs and SIG Contributor Experience on documenting
    language recommendations and processes
  - Work with the Code of Conduct Committee to add code architecture to the COC

## Dissolution Criteria

Once the Kubernetes community has:

- A process in place to evaluate language changes on an ongoing basis
- A binding list of terms to avoid in codebases across the project
- A timeline on which to replace component names in the kubernetes/kubernetes
  codebase
- Defined long-term ownership of the policies and processes this WG creates

> 

Reviewer 6: non-blocking nit: whitespace

Author: @cblecker -- intentional. see the next line.
